---
date: 181230
place: israel
---

30 December 2018. The day I met a group of people that would soon become my closest friends. Over the course of 10 days, we saw more of Israel than I thought was possible. We started in Jerusalem, where we got to celebrate the ringing in of the new year, and left each other in Tel Aviv, where we spent the morning in Sarona Market, coming to terms with saying goodbye.

##### Jerusalem.
We spent 2 full days in Jerusalem, one to step into the lives of an Israeli citizen and one to learn about Israel's current affairs. This is also when we met 8 Israelis that were serving in the IDF (Israel Defense Forces). These 8 Israelis were an integral part of our trip, teaching us more about Israel than merely travelling through Israel ever could. In the 2 days that we were in Jerusalem, we visited the Old City (including the Western Wall), the City of David, Mount Herzl, Susan's house, and one of Israel's many startup companies. The City of David has always been one of my favourite parts of Jerusalem, with an amazing view overlooking the Kidron Valley, so it was nice to get to visit it once again.

##### Kfar Hanokdim
After our first 3 nights, we re-packed our bags and set off to the South. The long bus ride was just what we all needed after 3 nights of little sleep. We stopped at the Path for Peace by the Gaza Border before taking a brief ride through the desert on some camels and then seeing the tent we'd be sleeping in that night in Kfar Hanokdim, a Bedouin camp. After running around in Jerusalem, it was nice to take a night off, playing games, singing, and making s'mores by a bonfire. We knew we would be waking up early the next morning to hike to Masada and watch the sunrise, and had been instructed to get to bed early. But, being the rebellious young adults we proved to be throughout the trip, we stayed up far too late and ended up getting about 2 hours of sleep and weren't even able to see the sunrise through the clouds. The disappointment didn't last long, though, as we went back to the camp to eat breakfast (even if the trip had gone terribly wrong, the falafel, hummus, and pita would have made up for it) and then travelled on to the Dead Sea. Despite being warned to keep the water as far away as possible from our faces, we somehow all managed to get out of the sea crying, with salty water all over our faces.

##### Tel Aviv
Tel Aviv, my favourite city in Israel! We got to spend 3 days in Tel Aviv, with a full day solely for our own exploration. Though being told to go anywhere *except* for the beach, somehow we all ended up at... the beach. It was worth it though, breaking the rules. It was a beautiful day. But eventually we had to leave the beach to get back to the hotel for our first Shabbat as a group. The next day we did a walking tour around Jaffa, which I really enjoyed. We passed street performers, art galleries, and got to walk along the water. That night, we had a free night out in Tel Aviv. It was nice to spend time with my new friends, without worrying about any rules we could be breaking. Unfortunately, we did have to worry about our early wake-up time the next morning. The next day was probably the most tired I've ever been (save the last day of this trip). We went to some museums and had to say goodbye to the Israelis, so I do wish I had been more alert, but there was nothing I could do about it then besides drink 3 cups of strong Israeli coffee.

##### Sea of Galilee
It was sad to say goodbye to the Israelis, and the mood visibly dropped when they left. The weather portrayed this well, as the further North we got, the colder and rainier it got as well. When we got to the Golan Heights, where we were supposed to do a hike, we found snowy mountains and closed-off roads. Instead, we took golf buggies around a nature reserve and learned about bird migration (and had some unofficial, unsanctioned buggy races) and we got to visit one of the Israelis that had left the previous day. It was nice to be in a real house, cuddled up on couches, drinking hot coffee and eating Israeli snacks. The penultimate night was fun, as we learned how to do some of the dances from Just Dance, but also tinged with sadness, as we knew we would soon be saying goodbye. The next day was no nicer, foggy with bursts of rain throughout the day. We walked through Safed, where we got to make challah and buy handmade candles.

##### Netanya
Our last night was spent in Netanya. We played some games and were then surprised with a goodbye video of pictures from the trip (I cried). Then we had the chance to leave messages for each other on pieces of paper (which I read, then cried again). Our last night ended with a big party that everybody joined in on. It was a good night. Wistful and sentimental, but overall a great ending to a life-changing trip.

09 January 2019. In just 10 days, I learned so much about myself, the people around me, and the country of Israel. Saying goodbye to my friends was hard, but since the trip I have gotten to see many of them all around the UK. Some have met me in St Andrews, and I have travelled to London, Cambridge, and Durham to see more. I wasn't sure whether I would be able to keep in touch with this group of people, but it has proven to be extremely easy. Birthright UK, thank you.