---
date: 190114
place: morocco
---

The human condition is a term referring to the characteristics, events, situations that encompass the whole of human existence. This includes birth, growth, emotions, conflicts, desire, and morality. Throughout three novels, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep, Ubik, and We Can Remember It For You Wholesale, author Philip K Dick examines technology’s role as a catalyst for the decomposition of the human condition and its negative influence on bureaucratic companies in a middle class, postmodern society. Each novel’s futuristic setting includes at least one kind of technology that yields to some cataclysmic disaster and the eventual degradation of humanity. According to Christopher Sims, PhD, a lecturer at Ohio University, “Technology can imply abstract structures such as language and mathematics, as well; both are efforts to organize and systemize the human experience of reality, and both become instruments that give humans an advantage” (67).

In this context, the word advantage refers to the theory of evolution within the Earth’s overarching ecosystem where organisms compete with one another for survival. Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep features protagonist Rick Deckard in a post war era where government originally created androids, or “Synthetic Freedom Fighters” (Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep 14), to fight in World War Terminus, but when the war ended, they were repurposed as slaves. The cold-pacs featured in Philip K Dick’s Ubik are used by Joe Chip to extend the life of someone who has fatal injuries or is dying by keeping them in suspended animation. Dick tampers with the idea of real versus false memory in his novel We Can Remember It For You Wholesale where protagonist Douglas Quail has a longing to visit Mars, so he goes to REKAL, a memory implantation company. Though humans may not be the most intelligent beings on the planet, they have the most capability to comprehend how technology works and have used this knowledge over time to preserve, extend, and improve human life.
